The following is a conversation with Matt Potmanick, Director of Neuroscience Research at DeepMind.
He's a brilliant cross disciplinary mind navigating effortlessly between cognitive psychology,
computational neuroscience, and artificial intelligence.
Quick summary of the ads. Two sponsors. The Jordan Harbinger Show and Magic Spoon Serial.
Please consider supporting the podcast by going to jordanharbinger.com slash lex and
also going to magicspoon.com slash lex and using code lex at checkout after you buy all of their
serial. Click the links by the stuff. It's the best way to support this podcast and journey I'm on.
If you enjoy this podcast, subscribe on YouTube, review it with 5,000 apple podcast,
follow on Spotify, support on Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Freedman, spelled
surprisingly without the E just F R I D M A N. As usual, I'll do a few minutes of ads now and
never any ads in the middle that can break the flow of the conversation. This episode is supported
by the Jordan Harbinger Show. Go to jordanharbinger.com slash lex. It's how he knows I sent you.
On that page, subscribe to his podcast, an apple podcast, Spotify, and you know where to look.
I've been binging on his podcast. Jordan is a great interviewer and even a better human being.
I recently listened to his conversation with Jack Barsky, former sleeper agent for the KGB in the
80s and author of deep undercover, which is a memoir that paints yet another interesting
perspective on the Cold War era. I've been reading a lot about the Stalin and then Gorbachev and
Putin eras of Russia, but this conversation made me realize that I need to do a deep dive into the
Cold War era to get a complete picture of Russia's recent history. Again, go to jordanharbinger.com
slash lex. Subscribe to his podcast. It's how he knows I sent you. It's awesome. You won't regret it.
This episode is also supported by Magic Spoon, low carb, keto friendly, super amazingly delicious
cereal. I've been on a keto or very low carb diet for a long time now. It helps with my
mental performance. It helps with my physical performance, even doing this crazy push up
pull up challenge I'm doing, including the running. It just feels great. I used to love cereal.
Obviously I can't have it now because most cereals have a crazy amount of sugar,
which is terrible for you. So I quit it years ago, but Magic Spoon amazingly somehow is a
totally different thing. Zero sugar, 11 grams of protein and only three net grams of carbs.
It tastes delicious. It has a lot of flavors, two new ones, including peanut butter. But if you
know what's good for you, you'll go with cocoa, my favorite flavor and the flavor of champions.
Click the magicspoon.com slash lex link in the description and use code lex at checkout for
free shipping and to let them know I sent you. They have agreed to sponsor this podcast for a long
time. They're an amazing sponsor and an even better cereal. I highly recommend it. It's delicious.
It's good for you. You won't regret it. And now here's my conversation with Matt
Botkinick. How much of the human brain do you think we understand?
I think we're at a weird moment in the history of neuroscience in the sense that
I feel like we understand a lot about the brain at a very high level,
but a very coarse level.
When you say high level, what are you thinking? Are you thinking functional? Are you thinking
structurally? In other words, what is the brain for? What kinds of computation does the brain do?
What kinds of behaviors would we have to explain if we were going to look down at the
mechanistic level? At that level, I feel like we understand much, much more about the brain
than we did when I was in high school. But it's almost like we're seeing it through a fog. It's
only at a very coarse level. We don't really understand what the neuronal mechanisms are
that underlie these computations. We've gotten better at saying, what are the functions that
the brain is computing that we would have to understand if we were going to get down to the
neuronal level? At the other end of the spectrum, in the last few years, incredible progress has been
made in terms of technologies that allow us to see, actually literally see in some cases,
what's going on at the single unit level, even the dendritic level, and then there's this
yawning gap in between. That's interesting. At the high level, so that's almost a cognitive
science level. And then at the neuronal level, that's neurobiology and neuroscience just studying
single neurons, the synaptic connections and all the dopamine, all the kind of neurotransmitters.
One blanket statement I should probably make is that as I've gotten older, I have become more and
more reluctant to make a distinction between psychology and neuroscience. To me, the point
of neuroscience is to study what the brain is for. If you're a nephrologist and you want to
learn about the kidney, you start by saying, what is this thing for? Well,
it seems to be for taking blood on one side that has metabolites in it that shouldn't be there,
sucking them out of the blood while leaving the good stuff behind, and then excreting that in
the form of urine. That's what the kidney is for. It's like obvious. So the rest of the work is
deciding how it does that. And this, it seems to me, is the right approach to take to the brain.
You say, well, what is the brain for? The brain, as far as I can tell, is for producing behavior.
It's for going from perceptual inputs to behavioral outputs. And the behavioral outputs
should be adaptive. So that's what psychology is about. It's about understanding the structure
of that function. And then the rest of neuroscience is about figuring out how those operations are
actually carried out at a mechanistic level. That's really interesting. But so unlike the kidney,
the brain, the gap between the electrical signal and behavior, you truly see neuroscience as the
science that touches behavior, how the brain generates behavior, or how the brain converts
raw visual information into understanding. You basically see cognitive science, psychology,
and neuroscience as all one science. It's a personal statement. Is that a hopeful or
realistic statement? So certainly you will be correct in your feeling in some number of years,
but that number of years could be 200, 300 years from now. Oh, well, well, there's a,
is that aspirational or is that pragmatic engineering feeling that you have?
It's both in the sense that this is what I hope and expect will bear fruit over the coming decades.
But it's also pragmatic in the sense that I'm not sure what we're doing in either psychology
or neuroscience, if that's not the framing. I don't know what it means to understand the brain
if part of the enterprise is not about understanding the behavior that's being produced.
I mean, yeah, but I would compare it to maybe astronomers looking at the movement of the
planets and the stars and without any interest of the underlying physics, right? And I would argue
that at least in the early days, there's some value to just tracing the movement of the planets
and the stars without thinking about the physics too much, because it's such a big leap to start
thinking about the physics before you even understand even the basic structural elements of...
Oh, I agree with that. I agree. But you're saying in the end, the goal should be to deeply understand.
Well, right. And I think... So I thought about this a lot when I was in grad school, because a lot
of what I studied in grad school was psychology. And I found myself a little bit confused about
what it meant to... It seems like what we were talking about a lot of the time were
virtual causal mechanisms. Like, oh, well, you know, attentional selection then selects some
object in the environment, and that is then passed on to the motor... Information about that is passed
on to the motor system. But these are virtual mechanisms. They're metaphors. There's no reduction
to... There's no reduction going on in that conversation to some physical mechanism that...
Which is really what it would take to fully understand how behavior is rising. But the
causal mechanisms are definitely neurons interacting. I'm willing to say that at this
point in history. So in psychology, at least for me personally, there was this strange insecurity
about trafficking in these metaphors, which we're supposed to explain the function of the mind.
If you can't ground them in physical mechanisms, then what is the explanatory validity of these
explanations? And I managed to soothe my own nerves by thinking about the history of
genetics research. So I'm very far from being an expert on the history of this field. But I know
enough to say that Mendelian genetics preceded Watson and Crick. And so there was a significant
period of time during which people were productively investigating the structure of inheritance
using what was essentially a metaphor, the notion of a gene. And genes do this and genes do that.
But we're the genes. They're sort of an explanatory thing that we made up. And we ascribed to them
these causal properties. So there's a dominant, there's a recessive, and then they recombine it.
And then later, there was a kind of blank there that was filled in with a physical mechanism.
That connection was made. But it was worth having that metaphor, because that gave us
a good sense of what kind of causal mechanism we were looking for.
Right. And the fundamental metaphor of cognition, you said, is the interaction of neurons.
Is that what is the metaphor? No, no, the metaphor, the metaphors we use in cognitive psychology are
things like attention, the way that memory works. I retrieve something from memory.
A memory retrieval occurs. What is that? That's not a physical mechanism that I can examine in
its own right. But it's still worth having that metaphorical level.
Yeah, I misunderstood, actually. So the higher level abstractions is the metaphor that's most
useful. But what about, how does that connect to the idea that that arises from interaction of
neurons? Is the interaction of neurons also not a metaphor to you? Or is it literally,
that's no longer a metaphor. That's already the lowest level of abstractions that could actually
be directly studied. Well, I'm hesitating because I think what I want to say could end up being
controversial. So what I want to say is, yes, the interactions of neurons, that's not
metaphorical. That's a physical fact. That's where the causal interactions actually occur.
Now, I suppose you couldn't say, well, even that is metaphorical relative to the quantum
events that underline. I don't want to go down that rabbit hole.
It's always turtles on top of turtles. It's all the way down.
There is a reduction that you can do. You can say these psychological phenomena
are can be explained through a very different kind of causal mechanism, which has to do with
neurotransmitter release. And so what we're really trying to do in neuroscience, large,
as I say, which for me includes psychology, is to take these psychological phenomena
and map them onto neural events. I think remaining forever at the level of
description that is natural for psychology, for me personally, would be disappointing.
I want to understand how mental activity arises from neural activity. But the converse is also
true. Studying neural activity without any sense of what you're trying to explain,
to me, feels like at best roping around at random.
Now, you've talked about this bridging of the gap between psychology and neuroscience,
but do you think it's possible? My love is, I fell in love with psychology and psychiatry in
general with Freud when I was really young and I hoped to understand the mind. And for me,
understanding the mind at least at a young age before I discovered AI and even neuroscience was
is psychology. And do you think it's possible to understand the mind without getting into all
the messy details of neuroscience? Like you kind of mentioned, to you, it's appealing to try to
understand the mechanisms at the lowest level. But do you think that's needed? That's required
to understand how the mind works? That's an important part of the whole picture. But I would
be the last person on earth to suggest that that reality renders psychology in its own right
unproductive. I trained as a psychologist. I am fond of saying that I have learned much more
from psychology than I have from neuroscience. To me, psychology is a hugely important discipline.
And one thing that warms in my heart is that
ways of investigating behavior that have been native to cognitive psychology since it's
dawn in the 60s are starting to become interesting to AI researchers for a variety of reasons.
And that's been exciting for me to see.
Can you maybe talk a little bit about what you see as beautiful aspects of psychology,
maybe limiting aspects of psychology? I mean, maybe just started off as a science, as a field.
To me, when I understood what psychology is, analytical psychology, like the way it's
actually carried out, it's really disappointing to see two aspects. One is how small the N is,
how small the number of subjects is in the studies. And two, it was disappointing to see
how controlled the entire, how much it was in the lab. It wasn't studying humans in the wild.
There was no mechanism for studying humans in the wild. So that's where I became a little bit
disillusioned to psychology. And then the modern world of the internet is so exciting to me,
the Twitter data or YouTube data, like data of human behavior on the internet becomes exciting
because the N grows and then in the wild grows. But that's just my narrow sense. Do you have
a optimistic or pessimistic cynical view of psychology? How do you see the field broadly?
When I was in graduate school, it was early enough that there was still a thrill in seeing
that there were ways of doing experimental science that provided insight to the structure of the
mind. One thing that impressed me most when I was at that stage in my education was
neuropsychology, analyzing the behavior of populations who had brain damage of different
kinds and trying to understand what the specific deficits were that arose from
a lesion in a particular part of the brain. And the kind of experimentation that was done and
that's still being done to get answers in that context was so creative and it was so deliberate.
It was good science. An experiment answered one question but raised another and somebody
would do an experiment that answered that question and you really felt like you were narrowing in on
some kind of approximate understanding of what this part of the brain was for.
Do you have an example from memory of what kind of aspects of the mind could be studied in this
kind of way? Oh, sure. I mean, the very detailed neuropsychological studies of language
function, looking at production and reception and the relationship between visual function,
you know, reading and auditory and semantic and still are these beautiful models that came
out of that kind of research that really made you feel like you understood something that you
hadn't understood before about how language processing is organized in the brain. But having
said all that, you know, I think you are, I mean, I agree with you that the cost of doing
highly controlled experiments is that you, by construction, miss out on the richness and complexity
of the real world. One thing that, so I was drawn into science by what in those days was
called connectionism, which is, of course, what we now call deep learning. And at that point in
history, neural networks were primarily being used in order to model human cognition. They
weren't yet really useful for industrial applications. So you always found neural
networks in biological form beautiful? Oh, neural networks were very concretely the thing that drew
me into science. I was handed, are you familiar with the PDP books from the 80s? I went to
medical school before I went into science. Really? Interesting. Wow. I also did a graduate
degree in art history, so I'm kind of exploring. Well, art history, I understand. That's just a
curious, creative mind. But medical school, with the dream of what, if we could take that
slight tangent, what did you want to be a surgeon? I actually was quite interested in surgery. I
was interested in surgery and psychiatry, and I thought that I must be the only person on the
planet who was torn between those two fields. And I said exactly that to my advisor in medical
school who turned out, I found out later to be a famous psychoanalyst. And he said to me,
no, no, it's actually not so uncommon to be interested in surgery and psychiatry.
And he conjectured that the reason that people develop these two interests is that
both fields are about going beneath the surface and kind of getting into the kind of secret.
I mean, maybe you understand this as someone who was interested in psychoanalysis.
There's a cliche phrase that people use now on like an NPR, the secret life of blankity blank.
Right? And that was part of the thrill of surgery was seeing the secret activity that's
inside everybody's abdomen and thorax. That's a very poetic way to connect it to
disciplines that are very practically speaking different from each other.
That's for sure. That's for sure. Yes. So how do we get on to medical school?
So I was in medical school and I was doing a psychiatry rotation and my kind of
advisor in that rotation asked me what I was interested in. And I said, well, maybe psychiatry.
He said, why? And I said, well, I've always been interested in how the brain works.
I'm pretty sure that nobody's doing scientific research that addresses my interests, which are,
I didn't have a word for it then, but I would have said cognition.
And he said, well, you know, I'm not sure that's true. You might be interested in these books.
And he pulled down the PDB books from his shelf and they were still shrink wrapped.
He hadn't read them, but he handed them to me. He said, you feel free to borrow these.
And that was, you know, I went back to my dorm room and I just, you know, read them cover to cover.
And what's PDP? Parallel distributed processing, which was one of the original names for deep
learning. And so I apologize for the romanticized question, but what, what idea in the space of
neural science in the space of the human brain is to you the most beautiful and mysterious,
surprising? What, what had always fascinated me, even when I was a pretty young kid, I think,
was the paradox that lies in the fact that the brain is so mysterious. And so it seems so distant.
But at the same time, it's responsible for the, the, the, the full transparency of everyday life.
It's, the brain is literally what makes everything obvious and familiar. And, and,
and, and there's always one in the room with you. I used to teach, when I taught at Princeton,
I used to teach a cognitive neuroscience course. And the very last thing I would say to the students
was, you know, people often, when people think of scientific inspiration,
the, the metaphor is often, well, look to the stars, you know, the stars will inspire you to
wonder at the universe and, and, you know, think about your place in it and how things work. And,
and I'm all for looking at the stars, but I've always been much more inspired and kind of my
sense of wonder comes from the, not from the distant mysterious stars, but from the extremely
intimately close brain. Yeah. There's something just endlessly fascinating to me about that.
The, like Jessica said, the, the, the one is close and yet distant in, in terms of our
understanding of it. Do you, are you also captivated by the, the fact that this very
conversation is happening because two brains are communicating? Yes. Exactly. The, I guess what I
mean is the subjective nature of the experience. If we can take a small tangent into the, the
mystical of it, the consciousness, or, or when you're saying you're captivated by the idea
of the brain, you're, are you talking about specifically the mechanism of cognition? Or,
are you also just like, at least for me, it's almost like paralyzing the beauty and the mystery
of the fact that it creates the entirety of the experience, not just the reasoning capability,
but the experience. Well, I definitely resonate with that, that latter thought. And I, I often find
discussions of artificial intelligence to be disappointingly narrow. You know, speaking
as someone who has always had an interest in, in, in art. Right. I was just going to go there
because it sounds like somebody who has an interest in art. Yeah. I mean, I, there, there,
there, there are many layers to, you know, to full bore human experience. And, and in some ways,
it's not enough to say, oh, well, don't worry, you know, we, we're talking about cognition,
but we'll add emotion, you know, there's, there's, there's an incredible scope to
what humans go through in, in every moment. And, and yes, so it's, that's part of what
fascinates me is that, is that our brains are producing that. But at the same time,
it's so mysterious to us how we literally, our brains are literally in our heads producing
this experience. And yet there, and yet there's, it's so mysterious to us. And so, and the scientific
challenge of getting at the, the actual explanation for that is so overwhelming. That's just, I don't
know that certain people have fixations on particular questions. And that's always, that's
just always been mine. Yeah, I would say the poetry that is fascinating. And I'm, I'm really
interested in natural language as well. And when you look at artificial intelligence community,
it always saddens me how much when you try to create a benchmark for the community together
around how much of the magic of language is lost when you create that benchmark, that there's
something we talk about experience, the, the music of the language, the wit, the something
that makes a rich experience, something that would be required to pass the spirit of the
touring test is lost in these benchmarks. And I wonder how to get it back in because it's very
difficult. The moment you try to do like real good rigorous science, you lose some of that magic.
When you try to study cognition in a rigorous scientific way, it feels like you're losing
some of the magic, the, the seeing cognition in a mechanistic way that AI folk at this stage in
our history. Okay, I agree with you. But at the same time, one, one thing that I found
really exciting about that first wave of deep learning models in cognition was
there was the fact that the people who were building these models were focused on the
richness and complexity of human cognition. So an early debate in cognitive science,
which I sort of witnessed as a grad student was about something that sounds very dry,
which is the formation of the past tense. But there were these two camps. One said, well,
the mind encodes certain rules. And it also has a list of exceptions. Because of course,
you know, the rule is add ED, but that's not always what you do. So you have to have a list of
exceptions. And, and then there were the connectionists who, you know, evolved into the deep learning
people who said, well, you know, if you look carefully at the data, if you look at actually
look at corpora, like language corpora, it's, it turns out to be very rich because, yes, there are,
there are, there's a, you know, the most verbs that, and, you know, you just tack on ED. And then
there are exceptions, but there are also, there's also, there are, there are rules that, you know,
there's the exceptions aren't just random. There are certain clues to which, which,
which verbs should be exceptional. And then there are exceptions to the exceptions. And
there was a word that was kind of deployed in order to capture this, which was quasi regular.
In other words, there are rules, but it's, it's messy. And there, there's, there's structure even
among the exceptions. And, and it would be, yeah, you could try to write down, you could try to write
down the structure in some sort of closed form, but really, the right way to understand how the
brain is handling all this, and by the way, producing all of this is to build a deep neural
network and train it on this data and see how it ends up representing all of this richness. So
the way that deep learning was deployed in cognitive psychology was, that was the spirit of it.
It was about that richness. And that's something that I always found very, very compelling, still
do. Is it, is there something especially interesting and profound to you in terms of our
current deep learning neural network, artificial neural network approaches, and the whatever
we do understand about the biological neural networks in our brain? Is there, there's some,
there's quite a few differences. Are some of them to you either interesting or perhaps
profound in terms of, in terms of the gap we might want to try to close in trying to create a human
level intelligence?
What I would say here is something that a lot of people are saying, which is that
one seeming limitation of the systems that we're building now is that they lack the kind of
flexibility, the readiness to sort of turn on a dime when the context calls for it. That is so
characteristic of human behavior. So is that connected to you to the, like which aspect of the
neural networks in our brain is that connected to? Is that closer to the cognitive science level of
now again, see like my natural inclination is to separate into three disciplines of
neuroscience, cognitive science and psychology. And you've already kind of shut that down by
saying you're kind of see them as separate. But just to look at those layers, I guess, where
is there something about the lowest layer of the way the neurons interact that is profound to you
in terms of this difference to the artificial neural networks? Or is all the key differences
at a higher level of abstraction?
One thing I often think about is that if you take an introductory computer science course
and they are introducing you to the notion of Turing machines, one way of articulating
what the significance of a Turing machine is, is that it's a machine emulator. It can emulate any
other machine. And that to me, that way of looking at a Turing machine really sticks with me. I
think of humans as maybe sharing in some of that character. We're capacity limited. We're not Turing
machines, obviously, but we have the ability to adapt behaviors that are very much unlike anything
we've done before. But there's some basic mechanism that's implemented in our brain that allows us to
run software.
But just on that point, you mentioned a Turing machine, but nevertheless, it's fundamentally
our brains are just computational devices in your view. Is that what you're getting at?
Like, it was a little bit unclear to this line you drew. Is there any magic in there,
or is it just basic computation?
I'm happy to think of it as just basic computation. But mind you, I won't be satisfied until somebody
explains to me what the basic computations are that are leading to the full richness of human
cognition. It's not going to be enough for me to understand what the computations are that allow
people to do arithmetic or play chess. I want the whole thing.
And a small tangent because you kind of mentioned coronavirus, there's group behavior.
Is there something interesting to your search of understanding the human mind
where behavior of large groups or just behavior of groups is interesting? Seeing that as a
collective mind, as a collective intelligence, perhaps seeing the groups of people as a single
intelligent organisms, especially looking at the reinforcement learning work you've done recently.
Well, yeah, I have the honor of working with a lot of incredibly smart people,
and I wouldn't want to take any credit for leading the way on the multiagent work that's
come out of my group or deep mind lately. But I do find it fascinating. And I think
it can't be debated. Human behavior arises within communities. That just seems to me
self evident. But to me, it is self evident, but that seems to be a profound aspects of
something that created. That was like, if you look at 2001 Space Odyssey, when the monkeys
touched the... Yeah. That's the magical moment, I think Yovar Harari argues that the ability of our
large numbers of humans to hold an idea, to converge towards idea together, like he said,
shaking hands versus bumping elbows, somehow converge without being in a room altogether,
just kind of this distributed convergence towards an idea over a particular period of time seems
to be fundamental to just every aspect of our cognition, of our intelligence. Because humans,
we'll talk about reward, but it seems like we don't really have a clear objective function under
which we operate, but we all kind of converge towards one somehow. And that, to me, has always
been a mystery that I think is somehow productive for also understanding AI systems.
But I guess that's the next step. The first step is try to understand the mind.
Well, I don't know. I mean, I think there's something to the argument that
that kind of bottom, like strictly bottom up approach is wrongheaded. In other words,
there are basic aspects of human intelligence that
can only be understood in the context of groups. I'm perfectly open to that. I've never been
particularly convinced by the notion that we should consider intelligence to adhere
at the level of communities. I don't know why. I'm sort of stuck on the notion that the basic
unit that we want to understand is individual humans. And if we have to understand that in
the context of other humans, fine. But for me, intelligence is just... I stubbornly define it
as something that is an aspect of an individual human. That's just my...
I'm with you, but that could be the reductionist dream of a scientist because you can understand
a single human. It also is very possible that intelligence can only arise when there's multiple
intelligences. When there's multiple... It's a sad thing if that's true because it's very difficult
to study. But if it's just one human, that one human would not be... Homo sapiens would not
become that intelligent. That's a possibility. I'm with you. One thing I will say along these lines
is that I think a serious effort to understand human intelligence,
and maybe to build a human like intelligence, needs to pay just as much attention to the
structure of the environment as to the structure of the cognizing system, whether it's a brain
or an AI system. That's one thing I took away actually from my early studies with the pioneers
of neural network research, people like Jay McClelland and John Cohen. The structure of
cognition is really... It's only partly a function of the architecture of the brain
and the learning algorithms that it implements. What really shapes it is the
interaction of those things with the structure of the world in which those things are embedded,
right? And that's especially important for... That's made most clear in reinforcement learning
where the simulated environment is... You can only learn as much as you can simulate,
and that's what made deep mind made very clear with the other aspect of the environment,
which is the self play mechanism of the other agent, of the competitive behavior, which
the other agent becomes the environment, essentially. And that's one of the most exciting
ideas in AI is the self play mechanism that's able to learn successfully. So there you go.
There's a thing where competition is essential for learning, at least in that context.
So if we can step back into another sort of beautiful world, which is the actual mechanics,
the dirty mess of it of the human brain, is there something for people who might not know?
Is there something you can comment on or describe the key parts of the brain that are
important for intelligence or just in general, what are the different parts of the brain that
you're curious about that you've studied and that are just good to know about when you're
thinking about cognition? Well, my area of expertise, if I have one, is prefrontal cortex.
So... What's that? Where do we... It depends on who you ask. The technical definition is anatomical.
There are parts of your brain that are responsible for motor behavior, and they're
very easy to identify. And the region of your cerebral cortex, the sort of outer crust of
your brain that lies in front of those is defined as the prefrontal cortex.
And when you say anatomical, sorry to interrupt. So that's referring to sort of the geographic
region as opposed to some kind of functional definition.
Exactly. So this is kind of the coward's way out. I'm telling you what the prefrontal cortex is
just in terms of what part of the real estate it occupies.
The thing in the front of the brain.
Yeah, exactly. And in fact, the early history of the neuroscientific
investigation of what this front part of the brain does is sort of funny to read because
it was really World War I that started people down this road of trying to figure out what
different parts of the brain the human brain do in the sense that there were a lot of people
with brain damage who came back from the war with brain damage. And that provided as tragic as that
was, it provided an opportunity for scientists to try to identify the functions of different brain
regions. And that was actually incredibly productive. But one of the frustrations that
neuropsychologists faced was they couldn't really identify exactly what the deficit was
that arose from damage to these most kind of frontal parts of the brain. It was just a very
difficult thing to pin down. There were a couple of neuropsychologists who identified
through a large amount of clinical experience and close observation, they started to
put their finger on a syndrome that was associated with frontal damage. Actually,
one of them was a Russian neuropsychologist named Luria, who students of cognitive
psychology still read. And what he started to figure out was that the frontal cortex was
somehow involved in flexibility, in guiding behaviors that required someone to override a
habit or to do something unusual or to change what they were doing in every flexible way from
one moment to another. So focused on like new experiences. And so the way your brain processes
and acts in new experiences. Yeah. What later helped bring this function into
better focus was a distinction between controlled and automatic behavior or in other
literatures this is referred to as habitual behavior versus goal directed behavior.
So it's very, very clear that the human brain has pathways that are dedicated to habits,
to things that you do all the time and they need to be automatized so that they don't
require you to concentrate too much. So that leaves your cognitive capacity free to do other
things. Just think about the difference between driving when you're learning to drive versus
driving after you're a fairly expert. There are brain pathways that slowly absorb those
frequently performed behaviors so that they can be habits, so that they can be automatic.
That's kind of like the purest form of learning. I guess it's happening there,
which is why, I mean, this is kind of jumping ahead, which is why that perhaps is the most
useful for us to focusing on and trying to see how artificial intelligence systems can learn.
Is that the way? It's interesting. I do think about this distinction between controlled and
automatic or goal directed and habitual behavior a lot in thinking about where we are in AI research.
But just to finish the kind of dissertation here, the role of the prefrontal cortex
is generally understood these days sort of in contradistinction to that habitual domain.
In other words, the prefrontal cortex is what helps you override those habits.
It's what allows you to say, well, what I usually do in this situation is X,
but given the context, I probably should do Y. I mean, the elbow bump is a great example.
Reaching out and shaking hands is probably a habitual behavior, and it's the prefrontal cortex
that allows us to bear in mind that there's something unusual going on right now. In this
situation, I need to not do the usual thing. The kind of behaviors that Luria reported,
and he built tests for detecting these kinds of things, were exactly like this. In other words,
when I stick out my hand, I want you instead to present your elbow. A patient with frontal
damage would have a great deal of trouble with that. Somebody proffering their hand would elicit
a handshake. The prefrontal cortex is what allows us to say, hold on. That's the usual thing,
but I have the ability to bear in mind even very unusual contexts and to reason about
what behavior is appropriate there. Just to get a sense, are us humans special in the presence of
the prefrontal cortex? Do mice have a prefrontal cortex? Do other mammals that we can study?
If no, then how do they integrate new experiences?
That's a really tricky question and a very timely question because we have
revolutionary new technologies for monitoring, measuring, and also causally influencing neural
behavior in mice and fruit flies. These techniques are not fully available even for studying
brain function in monkeys, let alone humans. It's a very urgent question whether the kinds
of things that we want to understand about human intelligence can be pursued in these
other organisms. To put it briefly, there's disagreement. People who study fruit flies
will often tell you, hey, fruit flies are smarter than you think. They'll point to experiments
where fruit flies were able to learn new behaviors, were able to generalize from one stimulus to
another in a way that suggests that they have abstractions that guide their generalization.
I've had many conversations in which I will start by recounting some
observation about mouse behavior, where it seemed like mice were taking an awfully long time to
learn a task that for a human would be profoundly trivial. I will conclude from that that mice
really don't have the cognitive flexibility that we want to explain, and that a mouse researcher
will say to me, well, hold on. That experiment may not have worked because you asked a mouse to
deal with stimuli and behaviors that were very unnatural for the mouse. If instead you
kept the logic of the experiment the same, but presented it the information in a way
that aligns with what mice are used to dealing with in their natural habitats,
you might find that a mouse actually has more intelligence than you think.
And then they'll go on to show you videos of mice doing things in their natural habitat,
which seem strikingly intelligent, dealing with physical problems. I have to drag this piece
of food back to my layer, but there's something in my way, and how do I get rid of that thing?
And so I think these are open questions to put it, to sum that up.
And then taking a small step back related to that, as you kind of mentioned, we're taking
that little shortcut by saying it's a geographic part of the prefrontal cortex is a region of
the brain. But what's your sense in a bigger philosophical view, prefrontal cortex and the
brain in general? Do you have a sense that it's a set of subsystems in the way we've kind of implied
that are pretty distinct? Or to what degree is it that? Or to what degree is it a giant
interconnected mess where everything kind of does everything and it's impossible to disentangle them?
I think there's overwhelming evidence that there's functional differentiation, that it's
clearly not the case that all parts of the brain are doing the same thing. This follows immediately
from the kinds of studies of brain damage that we were chatting about before. It's obvious from
what you see if you stick an electrode in the brain and measure what's going on at the level of
neural activity. Having said that, there are two other things to add which kind of, I don't know,
maybe tug in the other direction. One is that when you look carefully at functional differentiation
in the brain, what you usually end up concluding, at least this is my observation of the literature,
is that the differences between regions are graded rather than being discrete.
So, it doesn't seem like it's easy to divide the brain up into true modules that have clear
boundaries and that have clear channels of communication between them.
And this applies to the prefrontal cortex. Yeah, the prefrontal cortex is made up of a
bunch of different subregions, the functions of which are not clearly defined and the borders
of which seem to be quite vague. Then there's another thing that's popping up in very recent
research which involves application of these new techniques. There are a number of studies that
suggest that parts of the brain that we would have previously thought were quite focused
in their function are actually carrying signals that we wouldn't have thought would be there.
For example, looking in the primary visual cortex, which is classically thought of as
basically the first cortical way station for processing visual information, basically what
it should care about is where are the edges in this scene that I'm viewing? It turns out that
if you have enough data, you can recover information from primary visual cortex about all sorts of
things like what behavior the animal is engaged in right now and how much reward is on offer
in the task that it's pursuing. It's clear that even regions whose function is pretty well defined
at a core screen are nonetheless carrying some information about information from very different
domains. The history of neuroscience is this oscillation between the two views that you
articulated, the modular view and then the big mush view. I guess we're going to end up somewhere
in the middle, which is unfortunate for our understanding because there's something about
our conceptual system that finds it's easy to think about a modularized system and easy to
think about a completely undifferentiated system, but something that lies in between is confusing,
but we're going to have to get used to it, I think. Unless we can understand deeply the lower
level mechanism of neuronal communication and so on. On that topic, you mentioned information.
Just to get a sense, I imagine something that there's still mystery and disagreement on
is how does the brain carry information and signal? What in your sense is the basic
mechanism of communication in the brain? Well, I guess I'm old fashioned in that
I consider the networks that we use in deep learning research to be a reasonable approximation
to the mechanisms that carry information in the brain. The usual way of articulating that is to
say, what really matters is a rate code. What matters is how quickly is an individual neuron
spiking? What's the frequency at which it's spiking? Is it the timing of the spiking?
Yeah. Is it firing fast or slow? Let's put a number on that, and that number is enough to
capture what neurons are doing. There's still uncertainty about whether that's an
adequate description of how information is transmitted within the brain. There are studies
that suggest that the precise timing of spikes matters. There are studies that suggest that
there are computations that go on within the dendritic tree, within a neuron, that are quite
rich and structured and that really don't equate to anything that we're doing in our artificial
neural networks. Having said that, I feel like we're getting somewhere by sticking to this
high level of abstraction. By the way, we're talking about the electrical signal. I remember
reading some vague paper somewhere recently where the mechanical signal, like the vibrations or
something of the neurons also communicate information. I haven't seen that. There's
somebody was arguing that the electrical signal, this is in nature paper, something like that,
where the electrical signal is actually a side effect of the mechanical signal. I don't think
they changed the story, but it's almost an interesting idea that there could be a deeper.
It's always in physics with quantum mechanics, there's always a deeper story that could be
underlying the whole thing. You think it's basically the rate of spiking that gets us,
that's the lowest hanging fruit that can get us really far.
This is a classical view. The only way in which this stance would be controversial is
in the sense that there are members of the neuroscience community who are interested
in alternatives, but this is really a very mainstream view. The way that neurons communicate
is that neurotransmitters arrive, they wash up on a neuron. The neuron has receptors for
those transmitters. The meeting of the transmitter with these receptors changes the voltage of the
neuron. If enough voltage change occurs, then a spike occurs, one of these discrete events.
It's that spike that is conducted down the axon and leads to neurotransmitter release.
This is just like neuroscience 101. This is the way the brain is supposed to work.
What we do when we build artificial neural networks of the kind that are now popular in the AI
community is that we don't worry about those individual spikes, we just worry about the
frequency at which those spikes are being generated. People talk about that as the
activity of a neuron. The activity of units in a deep learning system is broadly analogous to
the spike rate of a neuron. There are people who believe that there are other forms of
communication in the brain. In fact, I've been involved in some research recently that suggests
that the voltage fluctuations that occur in populations of neurons that are below the
level of spike production may be important for communication, but I'm still pretty old school
in the sense that I think that the things that we're building in AI research constitute reasonable
models of how a brain would work. Let me ask just for fun a crazy question,
because I can. Do you think it's possible we're completely wrong about the way this basic
mechanism of neuronal communication, that the information is stored in some very different
kind of way in the brain? Heck yes. I wouldn't be a scientist if I didn't think there was any
chance we were wrong. If you look at the history of deep learning research as it's been applied to
neuroscience, of course, the vast majority of deep learning research these days isn't about
neuroscience, but if you go back to the 1980s, there's an unbroken chain of research in which
a particular strategy is taken, which is, hey, let's train a deep learning system. Let's train a
multi layer neural network on this task that we trained our rat on or our monkey on or this
human being on. Then let's look at what the units deep in the system are doing. Let's ask whether
they're doing resembles what we know about what neurons deep in the brain are doing. Over and
over and over and over, that strategy works in the sense that the learning algorithms that we
have access to, which typically center on back propagation, they give rise to patterns of activity,
patterns of response, patterns of neuronal behavior in these artificial models
that look hauntingly similar to what you see in the brain. Is that a coincidence?
At a certain point, it starts looking like such coincidence is unlikely to not be deeply meaningful.
The circumstantial evidence is overwhelmed. But you're always open to total flipping of the
table. Of course. You have coauthored several recent papers that weave beautifully between
the world of neuroscience and artificial intelligence. Maybe if we could just try to
dance around and talk about some of them, maybe try to pick out interesting ideas that jump to
your mind from memory. Maybe looking at, we're talking about the prefrontal cortex, the 2018,
I believe, paper called the prefrontal cortex is a matter of reinforcement learning system.
Yeah. Is there a key idea that you can speak to from that paper?
Yeah. The key idea is about meta learning. What is meta learning?
Meta learning is, by definition, a situation in which you have a learning algorithm,
and the learning algorithm operates in such a way that it gives rise to another learning algorithm.
In the earliest applications of this idea, you had one learning algorithm sort of adjusting
the parameters on another learning algorithm. But the case that we're interested in this paper is
one where you start with just one learning algorithm, and then another learning algorithm kind of
emerges out of thin air. I can say more about what I mean by that. I don't mean to be
scurrent. But that's the idea of meta learning. It relates to the old idea in psychology of
learning to learn. Situations where you have experiences that make you better at learning
something new. A familiar example would be learning a foreign language. The first time
you learn a foreign language, it may be quite laborious and disorienting and novel. But if
let's say you've learned two foreign languages, the third foreign language obviously is going
to be much easier to pick up. Why? Because you've learned how to learn. You know how this goes.
You know, okay, I'm going to have to learn how to conjugate. I'm going to have to...
But that's a simple form of meta learning, in the sense that there's some slow learning
mechanism that's helping you kind of update your fast learning mechanism. Does that bring
you into focus? From our understanding, from the psychology world, from the neuroscience,
our understanding how meta learning might work in the human brain, what lessons can we draw
from that that we can bring into the artificial intelligence world? Well, yeah. The origin of
that paper was in AI work that we were doing in my group. We were looking at what happens when you
train a recurrent neural network using standard reinforcement learning algorithms. But you train
that network not just in one task, but you train it in a bunch of interrelated tasks.
And then you ask what happens when you give it yet another task in that sort of line of
interrelated tasks. And what we started to realize is that a form of meta learning spontaneously
happens in recurrent neural networks. And the simplest way to explain it is to say
a recurrent neural network has a kind of memory in its activation patterns. It's recurrent by
definition in the sense that you have units that connect to other units that connect to other units.
So you have sort of loops of connectivity, which allows activity to stick around and be updated
over time. In psychology, in neuroscience, we call this working memory. It's like
actively holding something in mind. And so that memory gives the recurrent neural network
a dynamics. The way that the activity pattern evolves over time is inherent to the connectivity
of the recurrent neural network. So that's idea number one. Now, the dynamics of that network
are shaped by the connectivity, by the synaptic weights. And those synaptic weights are being
shaped by this reinforcement learning algorithm that you're training the network with.
So the punchline is, if you train a recurrent neural network with a reinforcement learning
algorithm that's adjusting its weights, and you do that for long enough, the activation dynamics
will become very interesting. So imagine I give you a task where you have to press one button
or another, left button or right button. And there's some probability that I'm going to give you
an M&M if you press the left button. And there's some probability I'll give you an M&M if you
press the other button. And you have to figure out what those probabilities are just by trying
things out. But as I said before, instead of just giving you one of these tasks, I give you a whole
sequence. You know, I give you two buttons, and you figure out which one's best. And I go,
good job. Here's a new box. Two new buttons. You have to figure out which one's best.
Good job. Here's a new box. And every box has its own probabilities, and you have to figure.
So if you train a recurrent neural network on that kind of sequence of tasks,
what happens, it seemed almost magical to us when we first started kind of
realizing what was going on. The slow learning algorithm that's adjusting the synaptic weights,
those slow synaptic changes give rise to a network dynamics
that the dynamics themselves turn into a learning algorithm. So in other words,
you can tell this is happening by just freezing the synaptic weights, saying,
okay, no more learning. You're done. Here's a new box. Figure out which button is best.
And the recurrent neural network will do this just fine. It figures out which button is best.
It kind of transitions from exploring the two buttons to just pressing the one that it likes
best in a very rational way. How is that happening? It's happening because the activity dynamics of
the network have been shaped by this slow learning process that's occurred over many,
many boxes. And so what's happened is that this slow learning algorithm that's slowly adjusting
the weights is changing the dynamics of the network, the activity dynamics, into its own
learning algorithm. And as we were realizing that this is a thing, it just so happened that the
group that was working on this included a bunch of neuroscientists. And it started kind of ringing
a bell for us, which is to say that we thought, this sounds a lot like the distinction between
synaptic learning and activity, synaptic memory and activity based memory in the brain.
And it also reminded us of recurrent connectivity that's very characteristic of
prefrontal function. So this is kind of why it's good to have people working on AI
that know a little bit about neuroscience and vice versa, because we started thinking about
whether we could apply this principle to neuroscience. And that's where the paper came from.
So the kind of principle of the recurrence they can see in the prefrontal cortex,
then you start to realize that it's possible for something like an idea of a learning to learn
emerging from this learning process, as long as you keep
varying the environment sufficiently. Exactly. So the kind of metaphorical transition we made
to neuroscience was to think, okay, well, we know that the prefrontal cortex is highly recurrent.
We know that it's an important locus for working memory for activation based memory.
So maybe the prefrontal cortex supports reinforcement learning. In other words,
what is reinforcement learning? You take an action, you see how much reward you got,
you update your policy of behavior. Maybe the prefrontal cortex is doing that sort of thing
strictly in its activation patterns. It's keeping around a memory in its activity patterns of what
you did, how much reward you got. And it's using that activity based memory as a basis for updating
behavior. But then the question is, well, how did the prefrontal cortex get so smart? In other
words, where did these activity dynamics come from? How did that program that's implemented in
the recurrent dynamics of the prefrontal cortex arise? And one answer that became evident in this
work was, well, maybe the mechanisms that operate on the synaptic level, which we believe are mediated
by dopamine, are responsible for shaping those dynamics. So this may be a silly question, but
because this kind of several temporal classes of learning are happening and the learning to
learn emerges, can you keep building stacks of learning to learn to learn, learning to learn
to learn to learn to learn? Because it keeps, I mean, basically abstractions of more powerful
abilities to generalize of learning complex rules. Or is this that's overstretching
this kind of mechanism? Well, one of the people in AI who
who started thinking about meta learning from very early on, Juergen and Schmitthuber,
sort of cheekily suggested, I think it may have been in his PhD thesis, that we should think
about meta, meta, meta, meta, meta, meta learning. That's really what's going to get us to true
intelligence. Certainly, there's a poetic aspect to it. And it seems interesting and correct that
that kind of levels of abstraction would be powerful. But is that something you see in the
brain? Is it useful to think of learning in these meta, meta, meta way, or is it just meta
learning? Well, one thing that really fascinated me about this mechanism that we were starting to
look at, and other groups started talking about very similar things at the same time. And then
a kind of explosion of interest in meta learning happened in the AI community shortly after that.
I don't know if we had anything to do with that. But I was gratified to see that a lot of people
started talking about meta learning. One of the things that I liked about the kind of flavor
of meta learning that we were studying was that it didn't require anything special. It was just
if you took a system that had some form of memory, that the function of which could be shaped by
pick your RL algorithm, then this would just happen. I mean, there are a lot of forms of,
there are a lot of meta learning algorithms that have been proposed since then that are fascinating
and effective in their domains of application. But they're engineered. There are things that
somebody had to say, well, gee, if we wanted meta learning to happen, how would we do that?
Here's an algorithm that would, but there's something about the kind of meta learning
that we were studying that seemed to me special in the sense that it wasn't an algorithm. It was
just something that automatically happened if you had a system that had memory and it was
trained with a reinforcement learning algorithm. And in that sense, it can be as meta as it wants
to be. There's no limit on how abstract the meta learning can get because it's not reliant on
a human engineering a particular meta learning algorithm to get there. And that's, I also,
I don't know, I guess I hope that that's relevant in the brain. I think there's a kind of beauty
in the ability of this emergent. The emergent aspect of it. Yeah, it's something that's
engineered. Exactly. It's something that just happens in a sense. In a sense, you can't avoid
this happening. If you have a system that has memory, and the function of that memory is
shaped by reinforcement learning, and this system is trained in a series of interrelated tasks,
this is going to happen. You can't stop it. As long as you have certain properties,
maybe like a recurrent structure to. You have to have memory. It actually doesn't have to be
a recurrent neural network. A paper that I was honored to be involved with even earlier
used a kind of slot based memory. Do you remember the title? It was memory augmented neural
networks. I think the title was meta learning in memory augmented neural networks.
And it was the same exact story. If you have a system with memory, here it was a different
kind of memory. But the function of that memory is shaped by reinforcement learning. Here it was
the reads and writes that occurred on this slot based memory. This will just happen.
This brings us back to something I was saying earlier about the importance of the environment.
This will happen if the system is being trained in a setting where there's a sequence of tasks
that all share some abstract structure. Sometimes we talk about task distributions.
That's something that's very obviously true of the world that humans inhabit.
But if you just think about what you do every day, you never do exactly the same thing that
you did the day before. But everything that you do has a family resemblance. It shares
structure with something that you did before. And so the real world is saturated with this
kind of this property. It's endless variety with endless redundancy. And that's the setting in
which this kind of meta learning happens. And it does seem like we're just so good at finding,
just like in this emergent phenomenon you described, we're really good at finding that
redundancy, finding those similarities, the family resemblance. Some people call it sort of,
what is it? Melanie Mitchell was talking about analogies. So we're able to connect concepts
together in this kind of way, in this same kind of automated emergent way, which there's so many
echoes here of psychology and neuroscience and obviously now with reinforcement learning with
recurrent neural networks at the core. If we could talk a little bit about dopamine, you have really,
you're a part of coauthoring really exciting recent paper, very recent in terms of release
on dopamine and temporal difference learning. Can you describe the key ideas of that paper?
Sure. Yeah. I mean, one thing I want to pause to do is acknowledge my coauthors on actually
both of the papers we're talking about. So this dopamine paper.
I'll just, I'll certainly post all their names.
Okay, wonderful. Yeah. Because I'm sort of a bashed to be the spokesperson for
these papers when I had such amazing collaborators on both. So it's a comfort to me to know that
you'll acknowledge them. Yeah, this is an incredible team there. But yeah.
Oh, yeah. It's such a, it's so much fun. And in the case of the dopamine paper,
we also collaborate with Naouchita at Harvard, who obviously a paper simply wouldn't have happened
without him. But so you were asking for like a thumbnail sketch of?
Yeah, thumbnail sketch or key ideas or, you know, things, the insights that, you know,
continue on our kind of discussion here between neuroscience and AI.
Yeah. I mean, this was another, a lot of the work that we've done so far is
taking ideas that have bubbled up in AI and, you know, asking the question of whether the
brain might be doing something related, which I think on the surface sounds like something that's
really mainly of use to neuroscience. We see it also as a way of validating what we're doing
on the AI side. If we can gain some evidence that the brain is using some technique that
we've been trying out in our AI work, that gives us confidence that, you know, it may be a good idea
that it'll, you know, scale to rich complex tasks that it'll interface well with other
mechanisms. So you see it as a two way road, just because a particular paper is a little
bit focused on from one to the, from AI, from neural networks to neuroscience. Ultimately,
the discussion, the thinking, the productive long term aspect of it is the two way road
nature of the whole. Yeah. I mean, we've talked about the notion of a virtuous circle between
AI and neuroscience. And, you know, the way I see it, that's always been there since the two fields,
you know, jointly existed. There have been some phases in that history when AI was sort of ahead.
There are some phases when neuroscience was sort of ahead. I feel like, given the burst of
innovation that's happened recently on the AI side, AI is kind of ahead in the sense that
there are all of these ideas that we, you know, for which it's exciting to consider that there
might be neural analogs. And neuroscience, you know, in a sense has been focusing on approaches
to studying behavior that come from, you know, that are kind of derived from this earlier era
of cognitive psychology. And, you know, so in some ways, fail to connect with some of the issues
that we're grappling with in AI, like how do we deal with, you know, large, you know, complex
environments. But, you know, I think it's inevitable that this circle will keep turning and there
will be a moment in the not too different distant future when neuroscience is pelting AI researchers
with insights that may change the direction of our work. Just a quick human question.
Is it you have parts of your brain? This is very meta, but they're able to both think about
neuroscience and AI. You know, I don't often meet people like that. So do you think, let me ask a
meta plasticity question. Do you think a human being can be both good at AI and neuroscience?
They're like, what on the team at DeepMind, what kind of human can occupy these two realms? And
is that something you see everybody should be doing, can be doing, or is that a very special
few can kind of jump? Just like we talked about art history, I would think it's a special person
that can major in art history and also consider being a surgeon. Otherwise known as a dilettante?
A dilettante, yeah. Easily distracted. No. I think it does take a special kind of person to be
truly world class at both AI and neuroscience and I am not on that list. I happen to be someone
who's interested in neuroscience and psychology involved using the kinds of modeling techniques
that are now very central in AI. And that sort of, I guess, bought me a ticket to be involved in
all of the amazing things that are going on in AI research right now. I do know a few people who I
would consider pretty expert on both fronts, and I won't embarrass them by naming them. But
there are exceptional people out there who are like this. The one thing that I find
is a barrier to being truly world class on both fronts is the complexity of the technology
that's involved in both disciplines now. So the engineering expertise that it takes to do
truly front line hands on AI research is really, really considerable.
The learning curve of the tools, just like the specifics of just whether it's programming
or the kind of tools necessary to collect the data, to manage the data, to distribute,
to compute all that kind of stuff. And on the neuroscience, I guess, side,
there'll be all different sets of tools. Exactly, especially with the recent
explosion in neuroscience methods. So having said all that, I think the best scenario
for both neuroscience and AI is to have people interacting who live at every point on this
spectrum from exclusively focused on neuroscience to exclusively focused on the engineering side
of AI. But to have those people inhabiting a community where they're talking to people who
live elsewhere on the spectrum. And I may be someone who's very close to the center in the
sense that I have one foot in the neuroscience world and one foot in the AI world. And that
central position I will admit prevents me, at least someone with my limited cognitive capacity,
from having true technical expertise in either domain. But at the same time,
I at least hope that it's worthwhile having people around who can kind of see the connections.
Yeah, the community, the emergent intelligence of the community when it's nicely distributed
is useful. Okay, so. Exactly, yeah. So hopefully that, I mean, I've seen that work,
I've seen that work out well at DeepMind. There are people who, I mean, even if you just focus on
the AI work that happens at DeepMind, it's been a good thing to have some people around doing
that kind of work whose PhDs are in neuroscience or psychology. Every academic discipline has its
kind of blind spots and kind of unfortunate obsessions and its metaphors and its reference
points. And having some intellectual diversity is really healthy. People get each other unstuck,
I think. I see it all the time at DeepMind. And I like to think that the people who bring
some neuroscience background to the table are helping with that.
So one of the, one of my, like, probably the deepest passion for me, what I would say,
maybe we kind of spoke off, Mike, a little bit about it, but that I think is a blind spot for
at least robotics and AI folks is human robot interaction, human agent interaction. Maybe
do you have thoughts about how we reduce the size of that blind spot? Do you also share
the feeling that not enough folks are studying this aspect of interaction?
Well, I'm actually pretty intensively interested in this issue now. And there are people in my
group who've actually pivoted pretty hard over the last few years from doing more traditional
cognitive psychology and cognitive neuroscience to doing experimental work on human agent
interaction. And there are a couple of reasons that I'm pretty passionately interested in this.
One is it's kind of the outcome of having thought for a few years now about what we're up to.
What are we doing? What is this what is this aid AI research for? So what does it mean to
make the world a better place? I think I'm pretty sure that means making life better for humans.
Yeah. And so how do you make life better for humans? That's a proposition that when you look at it
carefully and honestly is rather horrendously complicated, especially when the AI systems that
you're building are learning systems. You're not programming something that you then introduce
to the world and it just works as programmed like Google Maps or something. We're building systems
that learn from experience. So that typically leads to AI safety questions. How do we keep
these things from getting out of control? How do we keep them from doing things that harm humans?
And I mean, I hasten to say, I consider those hugely important issues. And there are large
sectors of the research community at DeepMind and, of course, elsewhere who are dedicated to
thinking hard all day every day about that. But I guess I would say a positive side to this too,
which is to say, well, what would it mean to make human life better? And how can we imagine
learning systems doing that? And in talking to my colleagues about that, we reached the
initial conclusion that it's not sufficient to philosophize about that. You actually have to
take into account how humans actually work and what humans want and the difficulties of knowing
what humans want. And the difficulties that arise when humans want different things.
And so human agent interaction has become a quite intensive focus of my group lately.
If for no other reason that, in order to really address that issue in an adequate way,
you have to, I mean, psychology becomes part of the picture.
Yeah. And so there's a few elements there. So if you focus on solving, if you focus on the
if you focus on the robotics problem, let's say AGI without humans in the picture is you're missing
fundamentally the final step. When you do want to help human civilization, you eventually have
to interact with humans. And when you create a learning system, just as you said, that will
eventually have to interact with humans, the interaction itself has to become part of the
learning process. So you can't just watch, well, my sense is, it sounds like your sense is you
can't just watch humans to learn about humans. You have to also be part of the human world.
You have to interact with humans. Yeah, exactly. And I mean, then questions arise that start
imperceptibly, but inevitably to slip beyond the realm of engineering. So questions like,
if you have an agent that can do something that you can't do,
under what conditions do you want that agent to do it? So if I have a robot that can play
Beethoven sonatas better than any human in the sense that the sensitivity,
the expression is just beyond what any human, do I want to listen to that? Do I want to go to
a concert and hear a robot play? These aren't engineering questions. These are questions
about human preference and human culture. Psychology, bordering on philosophy.
And then you start asking, well, even if we knew the answer to that, is it our place as AI
engineers to build that into these agents? Probably the agents should interact with humans
beyond the population of AI engineers and figure out what those humans want.
And then when you start, I referred this the moment ago, but
even that becomes complicated, be quote, what if two humans want different things?
And you have only one agent that's able to interact with them and try to satisfy their
preferences, then you're into the realm of economics and social choice theory and even
politics. So there's a sense in which if you follow what we're doing to its logical conclusion,
then it goes beyond questions of engineering and technology and starts to shade in perceptibly
into questions about what kind of society do you want? And actually, once that dawned on me,
I actually felt, I don't know what the right word is, quite refreshed in my involvement
in AI research. It's almost like building this kind of stuff is going to lead us back to asking
really fundamental questions about what's the good life and who gets to decide.
And bringing in viewpoints from multiple sub communities to help us shape the way that we
live. It started making me feel like doing AI research in a fully responsible way
could potentially lead to a kind of cultural renewal. It's the way to understand human
beings at the individual, the societal level, and maybe come a way to answer all the human
questions of the meaning of life and all those kinds of things. Even if it doesn't give us a
way of answering those questions, it may force us back to thinking about them. And it might
restore a certain, I don't know, a certain depth to, or even, dare I say, spirituality to
the way that, to the world. Maybe that's too grandiose.
Well, I'm with you. I think AI will be the philosophy of the 21st century, the way which
will open the door. I think a lot of AI researchers are afraid to open that door
of exploring the beautiful richness of the human agent interaction, human AI interaction.
I'm really happy that somebody like you have opened that door.
And one thing I often think about is the usual schema for thinking about
human agent interaction is this kind of dystopian, oh, our robot overlords.
And again, I hasten to say AI safety is hugely important. And I'm not saying we
shouldn't be thinking about those risks. Totally on board for that. But there's it.
Having said that, what often follows for me is the thought that there's another
kind of narrative that might be relevant, which is when we think of humans gaining more and more
information about human life, the narrative there is usually that they gain more and more
wisdom and they get closer to enlightenment and they become more benevolent. The Buddha is
like that's a totally different narrative. And why isn't it the case that we imagine that the AI
systems that we're creating, they're going to figure out more and more about the way the world
works and the way that humans interact and they'll become beneficent. I'm not saying that will
happen. I don't honestly expect that to happen without some careful setting things up very
carefully. But it's another way things could go, right? And I would even push back on that. I
personally believe that the most trajectories, natural human trajectories will lead us towards
progress. So for me, there is a kind of sense that most trajectories in AI development will
lead us into trouble to me. And we over focus on the worst case. It's like in computer science,
theoretical computer science has been this focus on worst case analysis. There's something
appealing to our human mind at some lowest level to be good. We don't want to be eaten by the tiger,
I guess. So we want to do the worst case analysis. But the reality is that shouldn't stop us from
actually building out all the other trajectories, which are potentially leading to all the positive
worlds, all the, all the enlightenment, this book enlightenment now was even Panker and so on.
This is looking generally at human progress. And there's so many ways that human progress
can happen with AI. And I think you have to do that research. You have to do that work. You
have to do the, not just the AI safety work of the one worst case analysis, how do we prevent that,
but the actual tools and the glue and the mechanisms of human AI interaction that would
lead to all the positive actions that can go. It's a super exciting area, right?
Yeah. We should be spending, we should be spending a lot of our time saying what can go wrong.
I think it's harder to see that there's work to be done to bring into focus the question of what
it would look like for things to go right. That's not obvious. And we wouldn't be doing this if we
didn't have the sense there was huge potential. We're not doing this for no reason. We have a
sense that AGI would be a major boom to humanity. But I think it's worth starting now, even when
our technology is quite primitive, asking, well, exactly what would that mean? We can start now
with applications that are already going to make the world a better place, like solving protein
folding. I think this deep mind has gotten heavy into science applications lately, which I think
is a wonderful, wonderful move for us to be making. But when we think about AGI, when we think
about building fully intelligent agents that are going to be able to, in a sense, do whatever they
want, we should start thinking about what do we want them to want? What kind of world do we want
to live in? That's not an easy question. And I think we just need to start working on it.
And even on the path to sort of AGI, it doesn't have to be AGI, but just intelligent agents that
interact with us and help us enrich our own existence on social networks, for example, and
recommend our systems of various intelligence. There's so much interesting interaction that's
yet to be understood and studied. And how do you create, I mean, Twitter is struggling with this
very idea, how do you create AI systems that increase the quality and the health of a conversation?
For sure. That's a beautiful, beautiful human psychology question.
And how do you do that without deception being involved, without manipulation being involved,
maximizing human autonomy? And how do you make these choices in a democratic way? How do you,
how do we, again, I'm speaking for myself here, how do we face the fact that it's a small group
of people who have the skill set to build these kinds of systems. But what it means to make the
world a better place is something that we all have to be talking about. The world that we're
trying to make a better place includes a huge variety of different kinds of people.
Yeah. How do we cope with that? This is a problem that has been discussed in gory,
extensive detail in social choice theory. One thing I'm really enjoying about the recent
direction work has taken in some parts of my team is that, yeah, we're reading the AI literature,
we're reading the neuroscience literature, but we've also started reading economics and,
as I mentioned, social choice theory, even some political theory, because it turns out that
it all becomes relevant. It all becomes relevant. But at the same time, we've been trying not to
write philosophy papers, right? We've been trying not to write position papers. We're trying to
figure out ways of doing actual empirical research that kind of take the first small steps to
thinking about what it really means for humans with all of their complexity and contradiction and
paradox to be brought into contact with these AI systems in a way that
really makes the world a better place. And often reinforcement learning frameworks actually
kind of allow you to do that machine learning. That's the exciting thing about AI is it allows
you to reduce the unsolvable problem, philosophical problem into something more
concrete that you can get a hold of. Yeah, and it allows you to kind of define the problem in some
way that allows for growth in the system that's sort of, you know, you're not responsible for the
details, right? You say, this is generally what I want you to do, and then learning takes care of
the rest. Of course, the safety issues arise in that context. But I think also some of these
positive issues arise in that context. What would it mean for an AI system to really come to understand
what humans want? And with all of the subtleties of that, humans want help with certain things,
but they don't want everything done for them, right? There is part of the satisfaction that
humans get from life is in accomplishing things. So if there were devices around that did everything
for, you know, I often think of the movie Wally, right? That's like dystopian in a totally different
way. It's like, the machines are doing everything for us. That's not what we want it. You know,
anyway, I just, I find this, you know, this kind of opens up a whole landscape of research
that feels affirmative and exciting. Yeah. To me, it's one of the most exciting and it's
wide open. Yeah. We have to, because it's a cool paper, talk about dopamine.
Oh, yeah. Okay. So I can, we were going to, we were going to, I was going to give you a quick
summary. Yeah. It's a quick summary of what's the title of the paper?
I think we called it a distributional, a distributional code for value in dopamine
based reinforcement learning. Yes. So that's another project that grew out of
pure AI research. A number of people that DeepMind and a few other places had started working
on a new version of reinforcement learning, which was defined by taking something in traditional
reinforcement learning and just tweaking it. So the thing that they took from traditional
reinforcement learning was a value signal. So at the center of reinforcement learning,
at least most algorithms, is some representation of how well things are going. You're expected
cumulative future reward. And that's usually represented as a single number. So if you imagine
a gambler in a casino and the gambler's thinking, well, I have this probability of winning such
and such an amount of money and I have this probability of losing such and such an amount
of money, that situation would be represented as a single number, which is like the expected,
the weighted average of all those outcomes. And this new form of reinforcement learning
said, well, what if we generalize that to a distributional representation? So now we think
of the gambler as literally thinking, well, there's this probability that I'll win this
amount of money and there's this probability that I'll lose that amount of money. And we
don't reduce that to a single number. And it had been observed through experiments, through just
trying this out, that that kind of distributional representation really accelerated reinforcement
learning and led to better policies. What's your intuition about, so we're talking about rewards.
So what's your intuition? Why that is? Why does it depend? Well, it's kind of a
a surprising historical note, at least surprised me when I learned it, that
this had been tried out in a kind of heuristic way. People thought, well, gee, what would happen
if we tried and then it had this empirically, it had this striking effect. And it was only then
that people started thinking, well, gee, why? Why? Why? Why is this working? And that's led to a
series of studies just trying to figure out why it works, which is ongoing. But one thing that's
already clear from that research is that one reason that it helps is that it drives
richer representation learning. So if you imagine two situations that have the same
expected value, that the same kind of weighted average value, standard deep reinforcement learning
algorithms are going to take those two situations and kind of in terms of the way they're represented
internally, they're going to squeeze them together. Because the thing that you're trying to represent,
which is their expected value, is the same. So all the way through the system,
things are going to be mushed together. But what if those two situations actually have
different value distributions? They have the same average value, but they have different
distributions of value. In that situation, distributional learning will maintain the
distinction between these two things. So to make a long story short, distributional learning
can keep things separate in the internal representation that might otherwise be conflated
or squished together. And maintaining those distinctions can be useful in when the system is
now faced with some other task where the distinction is important.
If we look at optimistic and pessimistic dopamine neurons, so first of all,
what is dopamine? Why is this at all useful to think about in the artificial intelligence sense?
But what do we know about dopamine in the human brain? What is it? Why is it useful?
Why is it interesting? What does it have to do with the prefrontal cortex and learning in general?
Yeah. So, well, this is also a case where there's a huge amount of detail and debate.
But one currently prevailing idea is that the function of this neurotransmitter dopamine
resembles a particular component of standard reinforcement learning algorithms, which is
called the reward prediction error. So I was talking a moment ago about these value representations.
How do you learn them? How do you update them based on experience? Well, if you made some
prediction about a future reward, and then you get more reward than you were expecting,
then probably retrospectively, you want to go back and increase the value representation
that you attached to that earlier situation. If you got less reward than you were expecting,
you should probably decrement that estimate. And that's the process of temporal difference.
Exactly. This is the central mechanism of temporal difference learning, which is one of
several sort of the backbone of our armamentarium in RL. And this connection between the reward
prediction error and dopamine was made in the 1990s. And there's been a huge amount of research
that seems to back it up. Dopamine may be doing other things, but this is clearly,
at least roughly, one of the things that it's doing. But the usual idea was that dopamine was
representing these reward prediction errors, again, in this single number way, representing your
surprise with a single number. And in distributional reinforcement learning, this kind of new
elaboration of the standard approach, it's not only the value function that's represented as a
single number, it's also the reward prediction error. And so what happened was that Will Dabney,
one of my collaborators, who was one of the first people to work on distributional
temporal difference learning, talked to a guy in my group, Zeb Kurt Nelson,
who's a computational neuroscientist, and said, gee, is it possible that dopamine might be doing
something like this distributional coding thing? And they started looking at what was in the
literature, and then they brought me in, and we started talking to Naochida. And we came up with
some specific predictions about if the brain is using this kind of distributional coding,
then in the tasks that now has studied, you should see this, this, this, and this. And that's where
the paper came from. We enumerated a set of predictions, all of which ended up being fairly
clearly confirmed, and all of which leads to at least some initial indication that the brain
might be doing something like this distributional coding, that dopamine might be representing
surprise signals in a way that is not just collapsing everything to a single number,
but instead is kind of respecting the variety of future outcomes, if that makes sense.
So yeah, so that's showing, suggesting possibly that dopamine has a really interesting
representation scheme in the human brain for its reward signal. Exactly. That's fascinating.
That's another beautiful example of AI revealing something nice about neuroscience,
potentially suggesting possibilities. Well, you never know. So the minute you publish paper like
that, the next thing you think is, I hope that replicates. I hope we see that same thing in
other data sets. But of course, several labs now are doing the follow up experiments. So we'll
know soon. But it has been a lot of fun for us to take these ideas from AI and bring them into
neuroscience and see how far we can get. So we talked about it a little bit, but where do you see
the field of neuroscience and artificial intelligence heading broadly? What are the
possible exciting areas that you can see breakthroughs in the next, let's get crazy,
not just three or five years, but next 10, 20, 30 years that would make you excited and perhaps
you'd be part of. On the neuroscience side, there's a great deal of interest now in what's
going on in AI. At the same time, I feel like neuroscience, especially the part of neuroscience
that's focused on circuits and systems, really mechanism focused, there's been this explosion
in new technology. Up until recently, the experiments that have exploited this technology
have not involved a lot of interesting behavior. And this is for a variety of reasons,
one of which is in order to employ some of these technologies, if you're studying a mouse,
you have to head fix the mouse. In other words, you have to immobilize the mouse.
And so it's been tricky to come up with ways of eliciting interesting behavior from a mouse
that's restrained in this way, but people have begun to create very interesting solutions to
this, like virtual reality environments where the animal can move a trackball. And as people have
begun to explore what you can do with these technologies, I feel like more and more people
are asking, well, let's try to bring behavior into the picture. Let's try to reintroduce behavior,
which was supposed to be what this whole thing was about. And I'm hoping that those two trends,
the growing interest in behavior and the widespread interest in what's going on in AI,
will come together to kind of open a new chapter in neuroscience research, where there's a kind of
a rebirth of interest in the structure of behavior and its underlying substrates. But that research
is being informed by computational mechanisms that we're coming to understand in AI. If we
can do that, then we might be taking a step closer to this utopian future that we were talking about
earlier, where there's really no distinction between psychology and neuroscience. Neuroscience
is about studying the mechanisms that underlie whatever it is the brain is for, and what is
the brain for? It's for behavior. I feel like we could maybe take a step toward that now,
if people are motivated in the right way. You also asked about AI. So that was the neuroscience
question. You said neuroscience. That's right. And especially places like DeepMind are interested
in both branches. What about the engineering of intelligence systems?
I think one of the key challenges that a lot of people are seeing now in AI is to build systems
that have the kind of flexibility that humans have in two senses. One is that humans
can be good at many things. They're not just expert at one thing. And they're also flexible
in the sense that they can switch between things very easily, and they can pick up new things
very quickly, because they very ably see what a new task has in common with other things that
they've done. And that's something that our AI systems do not have. There are some people who
like to argue that deep learning and deep RL are simply wrong for getting that kind of flexibility.
I don't share that belief, but the simpler fact of the matter is we're not building things yet
that do have that kind of flexibility. And I think the attention of a large part of the AI
community is starting to pivot to that question. How do we get that? That's going to lead to
a focus on abstraction. It's going to lead to a focus on what in psychology we call cognitive
control, which is the ability to switch between tasks, the ability to quickly put together a
program of behavior that you've never executed before, but you know makes sense for a particular
set of demands. It's very closely related to what the prefrontal cortex does on the neuroscience
side. So I think it's going to be an interesting new chapter. So that's the reasoning side and
cognition side, but let me ask the over romanticized question. Do you think we'll ever engineer an
AGI system that we humans would be able to love and that would love us back? So have that level
and depth of connection? I love that question. And it relates closely to things that I've been
thinking about a lot lately in the context of this human AI research. There's social psychology
research in particular by Susan Fisk at Princeton in the department where I used to work,
where she dissects human attitudes toward other humans into a two dimensional scheme.
One dimension is about ability. How able, how capable is this other person?
But the other dimension is warmth. So you can imagine another person who's very skilled and
capable, but it's very cold. And you wouldn't really like highly, you might have some reservations
about that other person. But there's also a kind of reservation that we might have about
another person who elicits in us or displays a lot of human warmth, but is not good at getting
things done. The greatest esteem that we, we reserve our greatest esteem really for people who
are both highly capable and also quite warm. That's like the best of the best. This isn't a
normative statement I'm making. This is just an empirical statement. These are the two dimensions
that people seem to kind of like, along which people size other people up. And in AI research,
we really focus on this capability thing. We want our agents to be able to do stuff. This thing
can play go at a super human level. That's awesome. But that's only one dimension. What's the,
what about the other dimension? What would it mean for an AI system to be warm? And I don't know,
maybe there are easy solutions here like we can put a face on our AI systems. It's cute. It has big
ears. I mean, that's probably part of it. But I think it also has to do with a pattern of behavior,
a pattern of, you know, what would it mean for an AI system to display caring, compassionate
behavior in a way that actually made us feel like it was for real, that we didn't feel like it was
simulated. We didn't feel like we were being duped. To me, that, you know, people talk about the
Turing test or some, some descendant of it. I feel like that's the ultimate Turing test.
You know, is there, is there an AI system that can not only convince us that it knows how to
reason and it knows how to interpret language, but that we're comfortable saying, yeah, that AI
system is a good guy. You know, like, I mean, that on the warmth scale, whatever warmth is,
we kind of intuitively understand it. But we also want to be able to, yeah, we don't understand it
explicitly enough yet to be able to engineer it. Exactly. And that's, and that's an open scientific
question. You kind of alluded to it several times in the human AI interaction. That's a question
that should be studied. And probably one of the most important questions as we move to AI.
Humans are so good at it. Yeah. You know, it's not just weird. It's not just that we're born warm,
you know, like, I suppose some people are, are warmer than others, given, you know, whatever
genes they manage to inherit. But there's also, there's also, there are also learned skills
involved, right? I mean, there are ways of communicating to other people that you care,
that they matter to you, that you're enjoying interacting with them, right? And we learn these
skills from one another. And it's not out of the question that we could build engineered systems.
I think it's hopeless, as you say, that we could somehow hand design these sorts of, these sorts
of behaviors. But it's not out of the question that we could build systems that kind of we,
we, we instill in them something that sets them out in the right direction. So that they,
they end up learning what it is to interact with humans in a way that's gratifying to humans.
I mean, honestly, if that's not where we're headed, I want out.
I think it's exciting as a scientific problem, just as you described. I honestly don't see a
better way to end it than talking about warmth and love. And Matt, I don't think I've ever had such a
wonderful conversation where my questions were so bad, and your answers were so beautiful.
So I deeply appreciate it. I really enjoyed it. It's been very fun. As you know, as you can probably
tell, I, I really, you know, I, there's something I like about kind of thinking outside the box and
like, um, so it's good having fun with that. Awesome. Thanks so much for doing it.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Matt Bopinik. And thank you to our sponsors,
The Jordan Harbinger Show and Magic Spoon Low Carb Keto Cereal. Please consider supporting
this podcast by going to Jordan Harbinger dot com slash Lex and also going to magic spoon dot com
slash Lex and using code Lex at checkout. Click the links, buy all the stuff. It's the best way
to support this podcast and the journey I'm on in my research and the startup. If you enjoy this
thing, subscribe on YouTube, review it with the five stars in a podcast, support on Patreon,
follow on Spotify, or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Friedman. Again, spelled miraculously
without the E just F R I D M A N. And now let me leave you with some words from neurologist
V S Sama Chandran. How can a three pound mass of jelly that you can hold in your palm,
imagine angels, contemplate the meaning of an infinity, even question its own place in cosmos,
especially awe inspiring is the fact that any single brain, including yours, is made up of atoms
that were forged in the hearts of countless far flung stars billions of years ago. These particles
drifted for eons and light years until gravity and change brought them together here now. These
atoms now form a conglomerate, your brain, they cannot only ponder the very stars they gave
at birth, but can also think about its own ability to think and wonder about its own ability to wonder.
With the arrival of humans, it has been said the universe has suddenly become conscious of itself.
This truly is the greatest mystery of all. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.